Add AKS with self-managed Calico docs (#2301)
tigera/docs: calico/getting-started/kubernetes/managed-public-cloud/aks.mdx

> 

Reviewer: Would you mind removing the Big picture line here too?

- **Support:**
  - Cluster supported by Azure
  - Calico features supported by the community or a commercial support plan
- **Features:**
  - Advanced Calico policy and global network policy
  - Whisker observability and other enterprise-grade capabilities

This approach gives you more control and access to advanced Calico policy features while still benefiting from Azure’s managed networking infrastructure.

### Option 3: Self-managed Calico for networking and network policy

You can also use Calico CNI as the primary networking plugin in AKS, replacing Azure CNI entirely.
This configuration provides the full Calico networking and policy feature set.

- **Networking:** Provided by Calico CNI
- **Network policy:** Implemented by Calico
- **Management:** You install, configure, and upgrade Calico
- **Support:**
  - Cluster supported by Azure
  - Calico features supported by the community or a commercial support plan
- **Features:**
  - Full Calico networking stack
  - Advanced policy, global policy, and observability tools

This option gives you maximum flexibility and functionality, but requires you to manage Calico yourself.

## Prerequisites

> - You have an Azure account with permissions to create resource groups and AKS clusters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You have an Azure account with permissions to create resource groups and AKS clusters.
```

- You installed and configured the [az command line tool](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/install-azure-cli).

> - You have [logged into Azure](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/authenticate-azure-cli) and [created a service principal](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/create-an-azure-service-principal-azure-cli)

Reviewer: Can we do without the logged in part? Is it really a requirement for any of the following procedures? (If it's a requirement for just the service principal thing, that doesn't count for our purposes. They'll figure that out when they do that with the Microsoft docs).

## How to

> ### Install AKS with Azure CNI for networking and Azure-managed $[prodname] for network policy

Reviewer: Remove the How to line, and promote each of the procedures to h2.

## Value

There are a number of ways to use $[prodname] in AKS:

1. use the built-in support for $[prodname] in AKS

  - AKS has built-in support for $[prodname], providing a robust implementation of the full Kubernetes Network Policy API.
  - Your $[prodname] installation will be managed and supported by Azure.

1. Azure networking with self-managed $[prodname]

  - You will be able to make use of advanced $[prodname] features, like $[prodname] policy, Global Network policy, Whisker observability, etc
  - Your cluster will be supported by Azure, but the Calico features would not be supported by Azure. You will need to upgrade Calico yourself. For community support, get an invite to our slack channel at: http://slack.projectcalico.org/ or raise an issue in GitHub. Commercial support plans are also available.

1. use $[prodname] for Networking and Policy in AKS, in place of the default Azure VPC networking

  - This allows you to take advantage of the full set of Calico networking features.

>   - Your cluster will be supported by Azure, but the Calico features would not be supported by Azure. You will need to upgrade Calico yourself. For community support, get an invite to our slack channel at: http://slack.projectcalico.org/ or raise an issue in GitHub. Commercial support plans are also available.

Reviewer: I suggest something structurally around these lines:
```
## Using Calico with AKS

Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS) supports multiple configurations for networking and network policy using Calico.  
Your choice determines how networking is implemented, who manages Calico, and which features are available.

### Option 1: Azure-managed Calico (built-in)

With this option, AKS uses the Azure CNI plugin for networking and the Azure-managed Calico implementation for network policy.

- **Networking:** Provided by Azure CNI  
- **Network policy:** Implemented by Azure-managed Calico  
- **Management:** Calico components are installed, upgraded, and supported by Azure  
- **Features:** Full Kubernetes Network Policy API (standard features only)

### Option 2: Self-managed Calico for network policy

In this setup, your cluster still uses Azure CNI for networking, but you install and manage Calico yourself to enable advanced policy and observability capabilities.

- **Networking:** Provided by Azure CNI  
- **Network policy:** Implemented by self-managed Calico  
- **Management:** You install, configure, and upgrade Calico  
- **Support:**  
  - Cluster supported by Azure  
  - Calico features supported by the community or a commercial support plan
- **Features:**  
  - Advanced Calico policy and global network policy  
  - Whisker observability and other enterprise-grade capabilities

This approach gives you more control and access to advanced Calico policy features while still benefiting from Azure’s managed networking infrastructure.

### Option 3: Self-managed Calico for networking and network policy

You can also use Calico CNI as the primary networking plugin in AKS, replacing Azure CNI entirely.  
This configuration provides the full Calico networking and policy feature set.

- **Networking:** Provided by Calico CNI  
- **Network policy:** Implemented by Calico  
- **Management:** You install, configure, and upgrade Calico  
- **Support:**  
  - Cluster supported by Azure  
  - Calico features supported by the community or a commercial support plan  
- **Features:**  
  - Full Calico networking stack  
  - Advanced policy, global policy, and observability tools  

This option gives you maximum flexibility and functionality, but requires you to manage Calico yourself.
```

## Prerequisites

- [Install the `az` command line tool](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/install-azure-cli).
- [Login to Azure](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/authenticate-azure-cli)

> - [Create a service principal](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/create-an-azure-service-principal-azure-cli)

Reviewer: Better to phrase prerequisites as things that have already been done. So:

* You have an Azure account with permissions to do something. (I think we should say something like this)
* You installed and and configured the [`az` command line tool](#).
* You have a service principal

## How to

> ### Install AKS with Azure CNI and Azure-managed $[prodname] for network policy

Reviewer: I think it's may be good to be explicit and always use 'networking' and 'network policy' in the titles.

Install AKS with Azure CNI for networking and Azure-managed Calico for network policy

  details='Policy:Calico,IPAM:Azure,CNI:Azure,Overlay:No,Routing:VPC Native,Datastore:Kubernetes'
/>

>   ```bash

Reviewer: As a one-step procedure, format [as an unordered list](https://developers.google.com/style/procedures#single-step-procedures).

And we need an actual step:

```
* To create a cluster with Azure-managed Calico for policy, run the following command:
```

   # Create a resource group

>    az group create --name my-calico-rg --location westcentralus

Reviewer: repeated line

>    az group create --name my-calico-rg --location westcentralus

Reviewer: Dumb question. But does creating a resource group mean creating a cluster? Confusing names.

Author: No, creating a group just creates a group.  You need one to pass to the cluster create command so that it can put all the resources into the group.

     --resource-group my-calico-rg \
     --name my-calico-cluster \
     --location westcentralus \
     --pod-cidr 192.168.0.0/16 \
     --network-plugin azure \
     --network-policy calico
  ```

> ### Install AKS with Azure CNI and self-managed Calico for network policy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Install AKS with Azure CNI for networking and self-managed Calico for network policy
```

The geeky details of what you get:

<GeekDetails
  prodname='$[prodname]'
  details='Policy:Calico,IPAM:Azure,CNI:Azure,Overlay:No,Routing:VPC Native,Datastore:Kubernetes'
/>

> 1. Create an Azure AKS cluster with Azure CNI pre-installed, but no Network Policy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create an AKS cluster with Azure CNI for networking and no configuration for network policy:
```

   ```bash
   # Create a resource group
   az group create --name my-calico-rg --location westcentralus
   az aks create \
     --resource-group my-calico-rg \
     --name my-calico-cluster \
     --location westcentralus \
     --pod-cidr 192.168.0.0/16 \
     --network-plugin azure \
     --network-policy none
   ```

1. Get credentials to allow you to access the cluster with `kubectl`:

   ```bash
   az aks get-credentials --resource-group my-calico-rg --name my-calico-cluster
   ```

1. Now that you have a cluster configured, you can install $[prodname].

> 1. Install the Tigera Operator and custom resource definitions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Install the Tigera Operator and custom resource definitions:
```
Do the same when the sentence requires you to run the command that follows.

   ```bash
   kubectl create -f $[manifestsUrl]/manifests/operator-crds.yaml
   kubectl create -f $[manifestsUrl]/manifests/tigera-operator.yaml
   ```

> 1. Configure the $[prodname] installation.

Reviewer: Perhaps something more like: To complete the installation, apply the following custom resources:

Author: This time, I prefer my wording - in this step we are literally configuring the Calico installation.  i.e. applying a CRD that tells Operator how the user wants Calico installed.

Reviewer: I suppose. But many users aren't consciously configuring anything, though that may be what's actually going on. They're trying to install this, and this is the step that finishes the job. Happy to leave this for now. I'll want to consider this universally as part of the installation refactor.

   metadata:
     name: default
   spec:
     kubernetesProvider: AKS
     cni:
       type: AzureVNET

   ---

   # This section configures the Calico API server.
   # For more information, see: https://docs.tigera.io/calico/latest/reference/installation/api#operator.tigera.io/v1.APIServer
   apiVersion: operator.tigera.io/v1
   kind: APIServer
   metadata:
      name: default
   spec: {}

   ---

   # Configures the Calico Goldmane flow aggregator.
   apiVersion: operator.tigera.io/v1
   kind: Goldmane
   metadata:
     name: default

   ---

   # Configures the Calico Whisker observability UI.
   apiVersion: operator.tigera.io/v1
   kind: Whisker
   metadata:
     name: default
   EOF
   ```

1. Confirm that $[prodname] is up and running
   ```bash
   kubectl get tigerastatus
   NAME        AVAILABLE   PROGRESSING   DEGRADED   SINCE
   apiserver   True        False         False      100s
   calico      True        False         False      50s
   goldmane    True        False         False      55s
   ippools     True        False         False      105s
   whisker     True        False         False      80s
   ```
Check that all components report `AVAILABLE` as `True`.

> ### Install AKS with $[prodname] networking

Reviewer: Install AKS with self-managed Calico for networking and network policy

   kind: Installation
   apiVersion: operator.tigera.io/v1
   metadata:
     name: default
   spec:
     kubernetesProvider: AKS
     cni:
       type: AzureVNET

   ---

   # This section configures the Calico API server.
   # For more information, see: https://docs.tigera.io/calico/latest/reference/installation/api#operator.tigera.io/v1.APIServer
   apiVersion: operator.tigera.io/v1
   kind: APIServer
   metadata:
      name: default
   spec: {}

   ---

   # Configures the Calico Goldmane flow aggregator.
   apiVersion: operator.tigera.io/v1
   kind: Goldmane
   metadata:
     name: default

   ---

   # Configures the Calico Whisker observability UI.
   apiVersion: operator.tigera.io/v1
   kind: Whisker
   metadata:
     name: default
   EOF
   ```

1. Confirm that $[prodname] is up and running
   ```bash
   kubectl get tigerastatus
   NAME        AVAILABLE   PROGRESSING   DEGRADED   SINCE
   apiserver   True        False         False      100s
   calico      True        False         False      50s
   goldmane    True        False         False      55s
   ippools     True        False         False      105s
   whisker     True        False         False      80s
   ```

> Check that all components report `AVAILABLE` as `True`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Check that all components report `AVAILABLE` as `True`.
```

> Check that all components report `AVAILABLE` as `True`.

Reviewer: At the end of this doc, the old verification "kubectl get pods" is still there. Would you mind swapping out get tigerastatus? To have two different verifications on the same page is jarring.

  details='Policy:Calico,IPAM:Azure,CNI:Azure,Overlay:No,Routing:VPC Native,Datastore:Kubernetes'
/>

1. To create a cluster with Azure-managed Calico for policy, run the following command:

>   ```bash

Reviewer: If you add a space before each line of the code block, it will show up in line with the step. You can see this aligned correctly in the next procedure.

   # Create a resource group
   az group create --name my-calico-rg --location westcentralus
   az aks create \
     --resource-group my-calico-rg \
     --name my-calico-cluster \
     --location westcentralus \
     --pod-cidr 192.168.0.0/16 \
     --network-plugin azure \
     --network-policy calico
  ```

### Install AKS with Azure CNI for networking and self-managed Calico for network policy

The geeky details of what you get:

<GeekDetails
  prodname='$[prodname]'
  details='Policy:Calico,IPAM:Azure,CNI:Azure,Overlay:No,Routing:VPC Native,Datastore:Kubernetes'
/>

1. Create an Azure AKS cluster with Azure CNI for networking and no configuration for network policy:

   ```bash
   # Create a resource group
   az group create --name my-calico-rg --location westcentralus
   az aks create \
     --resource-group my-calico-rg \
     --name my-calico-cluster \
     --location westcentralus \
     --pod-cidr 192.168.0.0/16 \
     --network-plugin azure \
     --network-policy none
   ```

1. Get credentials to allow you to access the cluster with `kubectl`:

   ```bash
   az aks get-credentials --resource-group my-calico-rg --name my-calico-cluster
   ```

> 1. Now that you have a cluster configured, you can install $[prodname].

Author: Step with no action?

Author: ```suggestion
  Now that you have a cluster configured, you can install $[prodname].
```
